 Generative to Agentic AI: Survey, Conceptualization, and Challenges 1 Introduction 2 Generative AI to Agentic AI 2.1 Defining GenAI and Agentic AI 2.2 Capabilities Compared 2.3 Why Agentic AI? 2.4 Evolution of GenAI to Agentic AI 3 Agentic AI 3.1 Reasoning 3.1.1 Decomposition 3.1.2 Reflection 3.1.3 Planning and Search 3.1.4 Learning to Reason 3.2 Memory 3.2.1 Memory Types and Structures 3.2.2 Retrieval Augmentation 3.3 Tools 3.3.1 Tool Creation 3.3.2 Tool Selection 3.3.3 Tool Use 3.4 Interacting 3.4.1 Reinforcement Learning 3.4.2 Interacting in (Virtual) Worlds 3.4.3 Interacting with Humans 3.4.4 Interacting with Other Agents 3.5 Specifying and Evaluating Agentic AI 3.5.1 Specifying an Agent 3.5.2 Specifying Multi-Agents 3.5.3 Evaluating Agentic AI 4 Challenges Toward AGI 4.1 Challenges 4.2 Agentic AI to AGI? 5 Methodology and Related Work 5.1 Methodology and Scope 5.2 Related Surveys 6 Conclusion Generative to Agentic AI: Survey, Conceptualization, and Challenges \fnm Johannes \sur Schneider johannes.schneider@uni.li \orgname University of Liechtenstein, \city Vaduz, \country Liechtenstein Abstract Agentic Artificial Intelligence (AI) builds upon Generative AI (GenAI). It constitutes the next major step in the evolution of AI with much stronger reasoning and interaction capabilities that enable more autonomous behavior to tackle complex tasks. Since the initial release of ChatGPT (3.5), Generative AI has seen widespread adoption, giving users firsthand experience. However, the distinction between Agentic AI and GenAI remains less well understood. To address this gap, our survey is structured in two parts. In the first part, we compare GenAI and Agentic AI using existing literature, discussing their key characteristics, how Agentic AI remedies limitations of GenAI, and the major steps in GenAI’s evolution toward Agentic AI. This section is intended for a broad audience, including academics in both social sciences and engineering, as well as industry professionals. It provides the necessary insights to comprehend novel applications that are possible with Agentic AI but not with GenAI. In the second part, we deep dive into novel aspects of Agentic AI, including recent developments and practical concerns such as defining agents. Finally, we discuss several challenges that could serve as a future research agenda, while cautioning against risks that can emerge when exceeding human intelligence. keywords: Agentic AI, Generative AI, Conceptualization, Survey Contents 1 Introduction 2 Generative AI to Agentic AI 2.1 Defining GenAI and Agentic AI 2.2 Capabilities Compared 2.3 Why Agentic AI? 2.4 Evolution of GenAI to Agentic AI 3 Agentic AI 3.1 Reasoning 3.1.1 Decomposition 3.1.2 Reflection 3.1.3 Planning and Search 3.1.4 Learning to Reason 3.2 Memory 3.2.1 Memory Types and Structures 3.2.2 Retrieval Augmentation 3.3 Tools 3.3.1 Tool Creation 3.3.2 Tool Selection 3.3.3 Tool Use 3.4 Interacting 3.4.1 Reinforcement Learning 3.4.2 Interacting in (Virtual) Worlds 3.4.3 Interacting with Humans 3.4.4 Interacting with Other Agents 3.5 Specifying and Evaluating Agentic AI 3.5.1 Specifying an Agent 3.5.2 Specifying Multi-Agents 3.5.3 Evaluating Agentic AI 4 Challenges Toward AGI 4.1 Challenges 4.2 Agentic AI to AGI? 5 Methodology and Related Work 5.1 Methodology and Scope 5.2 Related Surveys 6 Conclusion 1 Introduction Agentic AI constitutes a paradigm shift in artificial intelligence , enabling systems to act independently, pursue broad objectives rather than isolated decisions, and carry out complex tasks that require reasoning elements such as planning and reflection. While it builds on earlier seeds of shallow reasoning and interaction already observed in early GenAI systems, Agentic AI extends and structures these capabilities profoundly. Agents (i) interact with environments and tools, and (ii) perform deep reasoning, which manifests as multi-step, problem-dependent computation with planning and reflection. For example, reasoning models such as ChatGPT o1 can spend minutes processing self-generated prompts as part of a search and planning process, whereas earlier GenAI models like ChatGPT 3.5 (released in 2022) typically provided instantaneous responses, as shown in Figure 1 . Figure 1: Reasoning models perform extensive problem-dependent computations, commonly employing problem analysis, planning and reflection, while non-reasoning is shown by immediate responses without intermediate steps. Beyond limited reasoning capabilities, tasks handled by GenAI are typically structured to be solved directly using the available information—that is, by generating an output from the input without engaging with the environment or external tools. In contrast, Agentic AI systems integrate elements of reinforcement learning: Agents interact with environments using tools through a sequence of actions, receiving feedback that informs and guides future actions via instant learning. Figure 2: On the ARC challenge [ 23 ] Agentic AI with its reasoning models such as o1 and o3 performing dynamic, extensive computations involving planning and reflection dramatically outperform other models. This new wave of AI fosters novel opportunities and challenges , making it crucial to understand and conceptualize differences clearly. Defining an autonomous agent is more challenging and riskier, as agents have a greater direct impact: they interact with the environment by taking actions and solve tasks with less-detailed instructions, leading to more diverse, unpredictable, and harder-to-control solutions. Moreover, capabilities such as autonomous memory use, flexible tool selection, and open-ended exploration amplify both the potential benefits and risks compared to GenAI. On the positive side, AI agents, like GenAI, can be used with plain, everyday language instead of complex programming languages, boosting ease of adoption. On the negative side, properly specifying an agent to account for various eventualities is more demanding than crafting a prompt for a narrower task. While some experts already warned against the threats of GenAI [ 58 ] , many researchers deemed those threats as overstated [ 105 ] . This is not a surprise, as GenAI models struggled to solve tasks that were easy for laypeople. For instance, in the ARC challenge [ 23 ] —which consists of tasks considered simple for ordinary people—early GenAI models and even more recent ones perform poorly. However, reasoning models that are part of Agentic AI show striking improvements , as illustrated in Figure 2 . In other areas, such as programming [ 41 ] and generating coherent and accurate radiology reports, Agentic AI models with reasoning capabilities also outperform other models [ 199 ] . These outcomes also suggest that Agentic AI represents a major step toward artificial general intelligence (AGI), where AI is not confined to a narrow domain but can generalize to new situations. However, scaling compute at test-time alone (a key aspect of deep reasoning) may not guarantee progress toward AGI, and important challenges remain, including training data limitations and error accumulation. Thus, the debate on the risks and opportunities of AI should intensify again, requiring a renewed and cautious assessment. Understanding the differences between the two is important for businesses to choose the right technology to save time and reduce costs, and for society and policymakers to engage in a meaningful ethical and social debate surrounding the technology [ 96 ] . However, the situation becomes more intricate as Agentic AI is not a magic bullet for all problems. In particular, it does not offer dramatic improvements over GenAI in all areas. This makes it challenging to assess which problems benefit from clear-cut gains that enable novel applications. Like GenAI, Agentic AI can make mistakes on relatively simple problems [ 199 ] . Social intelligence is not necessarily higher in models performing deep reasoning [ 65 ] , although differences may emerge in tasks requiring the anticipation of behavioral strategies, such as those found in games. Only minor improvements have been observed on translation tasks [ 30 ] . On the well-known MMLU benchmark—consisting of multiple-choice questions spanning factual and procedural knowledge from various domains—reasoning models show only a slight edge, as illustrated in Figure 4 , and at the cost of significantly greater computation. Many of these questions are considered “hard” in the sense that they require PhD level knowledge in specific domains. Likely, there are a number of analogous questions to those in the benchmark in the model’s training data – in the most extreme case even the questions and answers themselves. Thus, the questions may be easier to answer through association rather than genuine reasoning. Generally, fine-tuning GenAI models for specific domains may outperform Agentic AI models that lack domain-specific knowledge, while also incurring lower computational costs. Figure 3: Overview: The high-level discussion of GenAI to Agentic AI is followed by an in-depth treatment of Agentic AI, followed by challenges and outlook Figure 4: Agentic AI and GenAI performs similarly on MMLU [ 55 ] measuring a wide range of capabilities across disciplines(data from [ 112 ] ) Contribution and Overview: This manuscript enables the reader to better understand the novel risks and opportunities of Agentic AI through various conceptualizations and contextualizations. As detailed in Figure 3 , we first definitions contrasting GenAI and Agentic AI and compare their high-level capabilites. We also elaborate on limitations of GenAI and how Agentic AI overcomes (some of) them. While Agentic AI is often portrayed as an unforeseeable, sudden change causing instant disruption, we document its evolution from early GenAI systems, highlighting key milestones related to reasoning and interaction, and noting overlaps and differences with well-established AI paradigms such as reinforcement learning. Next, we provide a deep dive into Agentic AI. We discuss key aspects of Agentic AI, including reasoning (decomposition, multi-step reasoning, reflection, search and planning, memory, tools and interaction with the environment covering also a range of applications). We elaborate on how to specify AI agents, including both single-agent and multi-agent systems as well as how to evaluate Agentic AI systems. Finally, we describe the challenges of Agentic AI to further progress towards AGI, which constitute research opportuntities. We also caution on potential risk coming with AGI. Before concluding we elaborate on our research methodology and related surveys. Figure 5: From Generative AI to Agentic AI. Early GenAI such as GPT-3 [ 19 ] showed with minor effort basic reasoning and tool usage capabilities. These became much more profound over time, in particular, with Agentic AI, which includes elements from reinforcement learning such as interacting with the environment and other agents. 2 Generative AI to Agentic AI We start with defining both GenAI and Agentic AI before elaborating on their key characteristics, discussing the need for Agentic AI and the evolution of GenAI to Agentic AI from a research perspective. 2.1 Defining GenAI and Agentic AI While many academic works have some notion of Agentic AI, we found that different angles of it were most concisely described by leading AI companies: “Agentic AI uses sophisticated reasoning and iterative planning to autonomously solve complex, multi-step problems.” (NVidia [ 118 ] ) “Agentic AI systems are AI systems that can pursue complex goals with limited direct supervision” (OpenAI [ 134 ] ). We add perspectives emphasizing more the differences to GenAI. We start with a short definition focusing on high-level, non-technical aspects: “Generative AI generate and transform content based on specific user instructions.” “Agentic AI can autonomously execute complex tasks in dynamic environments requiring adaptation, interaction and reasoning in a goal-oriented manner.” This definition emphasizes differences in characteristics as shown in Table 1 . A more comprehensive definition with a more academic phrasing: Definition of Generative AI: “A system based on a foundation model that generates digital artifacts based on natural user instructions.” Digital artifacts can be anything ranging from simple binary decisions to text, images, and images. Natural user instructions refers to instructions that are easy to understand for humans and do not require deep technical or specific knowledge of the AI system, e.g., human language, or visual depiction such as photos or sketches. Definition of Agentic AI: “A system based on a foundation model that performs tasks potentially yielding artifacts based on natural user instructions, where the system is able to conduct and express complex reasoning including planning and reflection to solve tasks that require interaction with an environment or elaborate tool use.” Agentic AI can go beyond creating digital artifacts, as it might, e.g., control robots to produce or alter physical objects. It might also execute tasks that do not yield any directly observable artifact for a user, e.g., smart grid management or computer internal system optimizations such as scheduling computational resources to minimize costs while obeying constraints. That is, while an agent takes action that impact our world, the outcome is not a tangible artifact such as a text or images. In both definitions we included the term foundation model, which is a large deep learning network [ 145 ] though agents could be (and have been) built with other model types. However, many general and more detailed, technical aspects expressed in our and other works assume the usage of a foundation model as otherwise many claims are not substantiated. When emphasizing the interconnection between prior AI developments, one might say that: “Agentic AI builds on Generative AI by combining foundation models enhanced with the capability for tool usage, memory access with reinforcement learning with its notion of agents and planning to enable interaction and reasoning.” In contrast, GenAI only relies on foundation models with early models having only limited capabilities for tool usage and reasoning - This definition is aligned with Figure 5 . A foundation model is to GenAI what an agent is to Agentic AI. Agents themselves can be systems including a foundation model (see Figure 5 ). However, this is somewhat oversimplified, as the construct of agents in AI is rather old and goes beyond agents being a technical component [ 130 ] . Agentic AI is a subfield of AI, while an AI agent is the central object of study. Thus, Agentic AI is more comprehensive including procedures to training, evaluating, and defining agents, and coordinating multiple agents. It also covers non-technical aspects such as ethical, economic, social and philosophical debates. For brevity we shall often omit the term “systems” in combination with GenAI and Agentic AI. Aspect Generative AI Agentic AI Reasoning ✗ immediate responses ✓ iterative planning and reflection Interaction ✗ mostly only with user ✓ user, tools, real-world, other AI agents Execution capability ✗ single-step tasks ✓ Workflows, sequence of actions requiring diverse expertise Adaptability ✗ no self-improvement, bound to training data ✓ Collecting and leveraging experiences Autonomy ✗ user-driven ✓ self-directed Table 1: Comparison of Generative AI vs Agentic AI characteristics Autonomy Level Paradigm Description 0 - No Autonomy Classical Machine Learning Tackles narrow tasks it was explicitly trained for. 1 - Assistive Autonomy Generative AI Handles simple tasks with direct instruction. 2 - Partial Autonomy Agentic AI: Agent-Oriented Workflow Manages multi-step tasks with human oversight and intervention. 3 - High Autonomy Agentic AI: Goal-Oriented Collaboration Achieves complex tasks with occasional guidance. 4 - Full Autonomy Agentic AI: Autonomous Decision-Making Given goals, handles all aspects of tasks independently. Table 2: Autonomy levels for GenAI and Agentic AI based on [ 3 ] 2.2 Capabilities Compared In terms of their capability, Agentic AI differ from early GenAI in two foundational aspects: (i) Reasoning and (ii) interaction with an environment and tools. Other characteristics stated in the literature, such as adaptability, execution capability, and autonomy (shown in Table 1 ), depend heavily on reasoning and interaction. Regarding autonomy, GenAI can be viewed as assistive technology for simple tasks, requiring specific user instructions for each interaction, whereas Agentic AI demonstrates at least partial autonomy by executing multi-step tasks (see Table 2 ) [ 3 ] . Agentic AI allows users to define their own agents using less detailed descriptions that may include identity, professional role, constraints, tool-use capabilities, etc. [ 117 , 64 ] ; see Figure 15 for a concrete example. However, as of now, autonomy for both GenAI and Agentic AI may be severely constrained by legislation requiring human oversight [ 42 ] . Also adaptability including autonomous self-improvement and instant learning from experiences over a long time-span, is difficult as evidenced by prominent failures of earlier systems [ 12 , 25 ] and remains limited for Agentic AI. While many works focus on “LLM agents,” generalist agents possess multi-modal capabilities and can perform a wide range of tasks, including playing Atari games, controlling a real robot arm, and engaging in ordinary conversation [ 133 ] . 2.3 Why Agentic AI? Generative AI comes with a series of shortcomings some of which are shown in Table 1 . They motivate further development. More specifically, Agentic AI promises to eliminate or at least reduce some GenAI limitations, as summarized in Table 3 . One of the most pressing limitations of GenAI is its execution capability . Current state-of-the-art GenAI models struggle with moderately complex tasks that require multiple actions, such as simple browser interactions [ 36 , 210 ] , e.g., ordering a product in a webshop. Although early GenAI demonstrated basic reasoning and tool usage capabilities, it remained highly limited—similar to early AI systems like ELIZA in the 1960s, which could chat with humans but in an unsophisticated manner. This lack of capability can be partially compensated through sophisticated prompt engineering, such as providing detailed instructions on how to approach a problem. However, reasoning models require only high-level goals and can derive detailed solution steps on their own, thereby enhancing usability . The paradigm of scaling training data, models, and compute led to the breakthrough of foundation models [ 19 , 74 , 26 ] . Although this approach may continue to boost AI’s capabilities, it is not necessarily optimal. First, there is a significant lack of training data . Data can be expensive to collect—or, in some cases, impossible to obtain. It is not feasible to anticipate all potential tasks and gather large amounts of domain-specific training data for each. Early GenAI models had very limited memory . For example, ChatGPT 3.5 could only handle inputs of about 4000 words without access to external data sources. More modern foundation models part of Agentic AI can handle millions of input tokens and perform sophisticated retrieval of information to stay up-to-date, support reasoning, and reduce errors. Early GenAI generally lacked the capability to learn instantly . GenAI’s limited context window allowed it to consider only a few past user interactions, making it incapable of remembering context or feedback in long conversations. Modern models have much larger context windows and can dynamically retrieve relevant information from databases. Agentic AI systems can learn in a more trial-and-error fashion—e.g., by simulating potential outcomes [ 191 ] or incorporating real-time feedback from users or tools, such as compiler error messages for generated code. However, even for tasks that GenAI handles well, Agentic AI’s reasoning capabilities can reduce errors such as hallucinations—i.e., generated content that is unfaithful to the input [ 98 ] . These may either contradict the source content (intrinsic hallucinations) or be unverifiable (extrinsic hallucinations). Agents that perform self-verification and retrieve external knowledge tend to exhibit lower error rates [ 90 , 39 ] . Additionally, academic literature has extensively discussed other GenAI shortcomings, such as biases and interpretability , which remain unresolved despite significant efforts by both industry and academia [ 137 , 201 ] . Agentic AI improves transparency and interpretability by providing intermediate results allowing for easier verification and better understanding. Furthermore, Agentic AI’s reasoning capabilities offer the potential to reduce biases. Agentic AI enables dynamic and flexible dedication of resources during inference. For example, to improve performance for a specific task one might invest more computation as shown in Figure 2 , where tripling the spending in monetary terms improved performance from 25 to 32%, a relative gain of over 20%. GenAI can only approximate this behavior coarsely by switching between models of different sizes, such as small and large variants. In contrast, an agent encapsulating a single model allows fine-grained control of computation based on intermediate outputs. When resources like computation or electricity are limited, reasoning time—and thus response quality—can be reduced to serve more requests. Computational resources are spent both during model training and later during inference, i.e., when handling user tasks. Agentic AI enables novel configurations for improving cost-efficiency and amortization of AI products . Smaller, faster, and less costly models can achieve performance comparable to large models by incorporating reasoning. This ma