 Building the Foundation for Agentic AI | Bain & Company 14 captures 25 Sep 2025 - 01 Jul 2026 Jun JUL Aug 01 2025 2026 2027 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Organization: Archive Team Formed in 2009, the Archive Team (not to be confused with the archive.org Archive-It Team) is a rogue archivist collective dedicated to saving copies of rapidly dying or deleted websites for the sake of history and digital heritage. The group is 100% composed of volunteers and interested parties, and has expanded into a large amount of related projects for saving online and digital history. History is littered with hundreds of conflicts over the future of a community, group, location or business that were "resolved" when one of the parties stepped ahead and destroyed what was there. With the original point of contention destroyed, the debates would fall to the wayside. Archive Team believes that by duplicated condemned data, the conversation and debate can continue, as well as the richness and insight gained by keeping the materials. Our projects have ranged in size from a single volunteer downloading the data to a small-but-critical site, to over 100 volunteers stepping forward to acquire terabytes of user-created data to save for future generations. The main site for Archive Team is at archiveteam.org and contains up to the date information on various projects, manifestos, plans and walkthroughs. This collection contains the output of many Archive Team projects, both ongoing and completed. Thanks to the generous providing of disk space by the Internet Archive, multi-terabyte datasets can be made available, as well as in use by the Wayback Machine , providing a path back to lost websites and work. Our collection has grown to the point of having sub-collections for the type of data we acquire. If you are seeking to browse the contents of these collections, the Wayback Machine is the best first stop. Otherwise, you are free to dig into the stacks to see what you may find. The Archive Team Panic Downloads are full pulldowns of currently extant websites, meant to serve as emergency backups for needed sites that are in danger of closing, or which will be missed dearly if suddenly lost due to hard drive crashes or server failures. Collection: ArchiveBot: The Archive Team Crowdsourced Crawler ArchiveBot is an IRC bot designed to automate the archival of smaller websites (e.g. up to a few hundred thousand URLs). You give it a URL to start at, and it grabs all content under that URL, records it in a WARC, and then uploads that WARC to ArchiveTeam servers for eventual injection into the Internet Archive (or other archive sites). To use ArchiveBot, drop by #archivebot on EFNet. To interact with ArchiveBot, you issue commands by typing it into the channel. Note you will need channel operator permissions in order to issue archiving jobs. The dashboard shows the sites being downloaded currently. There is a dashboard running for the archivebot process at http://www.archivebot.com . ArchiveBot's source code can be found at https://github.com/ArchiveTeam/ArchiveBot . TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine - http://web.archive.org/web/20260701053636/https://www.bain.com/insights/building-the-foundation-for-agentic-ai-technology-report-2025/ Skip to Content Offices Close Offices North & Latin America Atlanta Austin Bogota Boston Buenos Aires Chicago Dallas Denver Houston Los Angeles Mexico City Minneapolis Monterrey Montreal New York Rio de Janeiro San Francisco Santiago São Paulo Seattle Silicon Valley Toronto Washington, DC Europe & Africa Amsterdam Athens Berlin Brussels Copenhagen Dusseldorf Frankfurt Helsinki Istanbul Johannesburg Kyiv Lisbon London Madrid Milan Munich Oslo Paris Rome Stockholm Vienna Warsaw Zurich Middle East Doha Dubai Riyadh Asia & Australia Bangkok Beijing Bengaluru Brisbane Ho Chi Minh City Hong Kong Jakarta Kuala Lumpur Manila Melbourne Mumbai New Delhi Perth Seoul Shanghai Singapore Sydney Tokyo See all offices Alumni Media Center Subscribe Contact Global | English Close Select your region and language Global Global (English) North & Latin America Brazil (Português) Argentina (Español) Canada (Français) Chile (Español) Colombia (Español) Europe, Middle East, & Africa France (Français) DACH Region (Deutsch) Italy (Italiano) Spain (Español) Greece (Elliniká) Asia & Australia China (中文版) Korea (한국어) Japan (日本語) Saved items ( 0 ) Saved items ( 0 ) You have no saved items. Bookmark content that interests you and it will be saved here for you to read or share later. Explore Bain Insights Industries Main menu Industries Aerospace & Defense Agribusiness Automotive Chemicals Construction & Infrastructure Consumer Products Financial Services Healthcare & Life Sciences Industrial Machinery & Equipment Media & Entertainment Industries Media & Entertainment Media Lab Metals Mining Oil & Gas Paper & Packaging Private Equity Industries Private Equity Due Diligence Exit Planning Firm Strategy & Operations Portfolio Value Creation Retail Social Impact Technology Telecommunications Industries Telecommunications Capital Expenditure Telco Digital Transformation Transportation Travel & Leisure Utilities & Renewables Consulting Services Main menu Consulting Services AI, Insights, and Solutions Customer Experience Innovation M&A Operations People & Organization Private Equity Sales & Marketing Strategy Sustainability Technology Transformation Digital Insights Main menu Insights Industry Insights Services Insights Bain Books Webinars Bain Futures View all insights Featured topics Tariff Response Artificial Intelligence Thriving in Uncertainty Executive Conversations Macro Trends B2B Growth Agenda Private Equity Report M&A Report Healthcare Private Equity Report Technology Report CEO Insights CFO Insights COO Insights CIO Insights CMO Insights View all featured topics About Main menu About What We Do What We Believe Our People & Leadership Client Results Awards & Recognition Global Affiliations Further: Our global responsibility Sustainability Social Impact World Economic Forum Learn more about Further Careers Main menu Careers Work with Us Careers Work with Us Find Your Place Our Work Areas Integrated Teams Students Internships & Programs Recruiting Events Life at Bain Careers Life at Bain Blog: Inside Bain Career Stories Our People Where We Work Supporting Your Growth Affinity Groups Benefits Impact Stories Hiring Process Careers Hiring Process What to Expect Interviewing FIND JOBS Offices Main menu Offices North & Latin America Offices North & Latin America Atlanta Austin Bogota Boston Buenos Aires Chicago Dallas Denver Houston Los Angeles Mexico City Minneapolis Monterrey Montreal New York Rio de Janeiro San Francisco Santiago São Paulo Seattle Silicon Valley Toronto Washington, DC Europe & Africa Offices Europe & Africa Amsterdam Athens Berlin Brussels Copenhagen Dusseldorf Frankfurt Helsinki Istanbul Johannesburg Kyiv Lisbon London Madrid Milan Munich Oslo Paris Rome Stockholm Vienna Warsaw Zurich Middle East Offices Middle East Doha Dubai Riyadh Asia & Australia Offices Asia & Australia Bangkok Beijing Bengaluru Brisbane Ho Chi Minh City Hong Kong Jakarta Kuala Lumpur Manila Melbourne Mumbai New Delhi Perth Seoul Shanghai Singapore Sydney Tokyo See all offices Alumni Media Center Subscribe Contact Global | English Main menu Select your region and language Global Select your region and language Global Global (English) North & Latin America Select your region and language North & Latin America Brazil (Português) Argentina (Español) Canada (Français) Chile (Español) Colombia (Español) Europe, Middle East, & Africa Select your region and language Europe, Middle East, & Africa France (Français) DACH Region (Deutsch) Italy (Italiano) Spain (Español) Greece (Elliniká) Asia & Australia Select your region and language Asia & Australia China (中文版) Korea (한국어) Japan (日本語) Saved items ( 0 ) Main menu Saved items ( 0 ) You have no saved items. Bookmark content that interests you and it will be saved here for you to read or share later. Explore Bain Insights Industries Toggle Industries menu Industries Aerospace & Defense Agribusiness Automotive Chemicals Construction & Infrastructure Consumer Products Financial Services Healthcare & Life Sciences Industrial Machinery & Equipment Media & Entertainment Metals Mining Oil & Gas Paper & Packaging Private Equity Retail Social Impact Technology Telecommunications Transportation Travel & Leisure Utilities & Renewables Consulting Services Toggle Consulting Services menu Consulting Services AI, Insights, and Solutions Customer Experience Innovation M&A Operations People & Organization Private Equity Sales & Marketing Strategy Sustainability Technology Transformation Digital Insights Toggle Insights menu Insights Industry Insights Services Insights Bain Books Webinars Bain Futures View all insights Featured topics Tariff Response Artificial Intelligence Thriving in Uncertainty Executive Conversations Macro Trends B2B Growth Agenda Private Equity Report M&A Report Healthcare Private Equity Report Technology Report CEO Insights CFO Insights COO Insights CIO Insights CMO Insights View all featured topics About Toggle About menu About What We Do What We Believe Our People & Leadership Client Results Awards & Recognition Global Affiliations Further: Our global responsibility Sustainability Social Impact World Economic Forum Learn more about Further Careers Explore Search insights, services, and experts" Popular Searches Agile Digital Strategy Your Previous Searches Recently Visited Pages Content added to saved items Saved items ( 0 ) Close Removed from saved items Saved items ( 0 ) Close Technology Report Building the Foundation for Agentic AI Building the Foundation for Agentic AI Capturing the full potential of agents will require modernizing enterprise architecture. By Pascal Gautheron, Chris Bell, and Stephen Hardy Published on September 23, 2025 min read Copy link Email LinkedIn X Facebook "> } Report Building the Foundation for Agentic AI Copy link Email LinkedIn X Facebook "> Progress: en At a Glance Agentic AI is a structural shift in enterprise tech, reshaping companies with agents that can reason, coordinate, and execute complex workflows. Most companies aren’t ready: Capturing full value requires rethinking systems, data, and governance to support scalable, safe agent deployment. Tech leaders should continue to modernize core platforms while prioritizing interoperability, security, and accountability. Early movers are focusing their investments on the most valuable areas, building foundational capabilities, and using agents in the transformation. This article is part of Bain’s Technology Report 2025 Explore the report Agentic AI isn’t just another wave of automation; it’s a structural shift in enterprise technology, one with the potential to completely redefine how work gets done. Previous waves of automation tackled parts of processes, leaving exceptions where humans had to step in. AI agents can reason, collaborate, and coordinate actions, allowing them to accomplish complex, multistep, nondeterministic processes that have so far depended on humans. It’s easy to see the transformative potential of this, from improved operational efficiency and customer experience to sharper decision making and beyond. Forward-looking leaders aren’t asking if agentic AI will reshape their business but how to prepare their organizations to deploy it safely and effectively. As executives reflect on how agentic AI might shape their business, from competitive positioning to their talent model, they will have to consider how it challenges the fundamentals of their IT architecture. Agentic AI architecture builds on the rise of composable microservices architecture and the use of enterprise cloud services that many companies have already been investing in. But to fully capture the value while navigating the risks, they will need to rethink how AI is embedded across the architecture—the systems, processes, and governance. Enterprises need to ensure agents have the context they need in real time, the ability to observe and explain behavior, and the guardrails to execute safely, securely, and cost-effectively. Current architectures simply cannot handle this balance when AI agents are used in the thousands across the enterprise—yet. Architecture adapts to support agentic AI Agentic AI should complement rather than take over the existing architecture. Tech teams will need to deploy it thoughtfully, with clear scope and controls in place. Agents are best for complex, nondeterministic problems that span multiple business domains and systems, rely on unstructured data and contextual reasoning, depend on real-time inputs, and until now have required human intervention. Higher-level orchestrator agents are like project managers that oversee a whole process, breaking it down into subtasks and tracking progress. Task agents execute individual tasks and send back the results to the orchestrator. The orchestrator then compiles results and adjusts workflows as needed. Teams updating the IT architecture should consider several key principles as they evolve the design to support an agentic framework (see Figure 1). Figure 1 Updating the IT architecture for agentic AI requires special attention to several facets Source: Bain & Company Modernize the core platform. To fully realize the potential of agentic AI, many organizations will need to modernize their technology foundations. This means making core business capabilities easy for agents to find and use in real time. Achieving this may require reworking older, batch-based systems to be more flexible, accessible by APIs, and able to respond to real-time events. Adopting modular, industry-standard frameworks, like the Banking Industry Architecture Network, will help accelerate this shift. However, these modern systems will need to work alongside existing infrastructure for the foreseeable future, which could add some architectural complexity in the near term. Ensure interoperability of agentic services. As agents roll out across the tech stack, consistent interoperability standards, such as the model context protocol (MCP), and frictionless integrations will be critical for breaking down silos and capturing the full value of agentic AI. Most organizations will need to support a mix of frameworks. These will include custom agents built on engineering tools, prebuilt agents embedded in vendor platforms, and dynamically generated agents in data platforms. Frameworks are themselves becoming more agentic. For example, a software development life cycle (SDLC) agent could coordinate a team of specialized agents (design, analyst, engineer, quality assurance) that collaborate to deliver a complete solution, from concept to deployment. Distribute accountability. While central platform teams will control the core agentic platforms, accountability for assembling, training, testing, deploying, and monitoring agents needs to be distributed to business domains. Success will hinge on making domain expertise and knowledge assets—such as product documentation, business logic, feature stores, models, and data products—readily discoverable and accessible to agents. Scale data access. Scalable access to structured and unstructured data is essential. Most organizations still lack the required ingestion pipelines for unstructured sources such as documents, emails, voice recordings, images, videos, and call transcripts. These data sources are critical for agentic reasoning, especially in manual or exception-driven processes where necessary knowledge often resides outside core systems of record or even outside the organization. For example, one European bank built foundational infrastructure to consistently use both structured and unstructured data to create a holistic view of each customer, enabling it to automate and personalize its engagement marketing—driving smarter, more targeted interactions at scale. Update governance and controls. As agents take on more decision making, governance and controls must evolve. Real-time explainability, behavioral observability, and adaptive security are essential to mitigate risk, maintain customer trust, and avoid regulatory or reputational fallout. At the same time, organizations must manage the volatility of compute costs through dynamic resource allocation, edge deployment strategies, and AI-native financial operations practices. Shift the engineering paradigm. Software engineering and DevOps processes, both tooling and workflows, need to evolve to manage the full life cycle of AI agents, including how they are tested, monitored, and safely deployed as they learn and adapt over time. AI agents are also poised to transform how engineering teams operate, taking on more of the day-to-day development, testing, deployment, and system operations. This shift will free up engineers to focus on higher-value work like architecture, strategy, and innovation. Reimagine agent experience and access. In this new framework, agents become first-class channels and citizens. As channels, they are emerging as primary interfaces for interacting with customers and employees—on par with websites, mobile apps, and call centers. As citizens, they are fully embedded participants in business operations, empowered to act, make decisions, and collaborate across systems. This demands a reimagining of experience design: Conversational interfaces will dominate human engagement, while agent-to-agent coordination will drive autonomous action across workflows, systems, and even organizational boundaries. To make this work at scale—and safely—enterprises must establish robust frameworks for identity, consent, and fine-grained access control. For example, a South American bank that uses agents to facilitate real-time PIX payments through WhatsApp allows customers to simply send a photo or text describing the payment they want to make. The AI agent interprets the request, identifies the appropriate payment, confirms it with the customer, and then authorizes and sends the payment—all within a conversational experience. The implementation imperative Over the next three to five years, 5% to 10% of technology spending could be directed toward building foundational capabilities, including agent platforms, communication protocols, real-time data access and discoverability for agents, and modern security and observability frameworks. Over time, investment in agentic AI will grow. Up to half of technology spending could be on agents running across the enterprise to support business domains. Still, the long-term economics are favorable, as efficiency and process improvements will outweigh the costs. Investments will need to be tightly focused, with an emphasis on delivering value quickly to ensure buy-in from the business. Frameworks for successful transformations typically follow a pattern of four motions: Focus on a few business domains to generate early value, rather than just building capabilities. Reimagining processes from end to end accelerates returns, lowers cost per agent, and lays the groundwork for scalable, enterprise-wide adoption. Evaluate current architecture for agentic readiness, identifying the capabilities required to scale. This includes laying the groundwork for agent development toolchains, enabling seamless system interoperability, and fast-tracking the modernization of vector databases, event architectures, and core infrastructure. Define and embed observability, security, governance, and controls, providing traceability, accountability, anomaly detection, and cost discipline. For agentic AI to scale safely across the enterprise, these guardrails must be built in from the start, not bolted on later. Use agentic AI in the transformation to reduce effort, control costs, and ensure outcomes. Delivering value early helps fund the rest of an agentic transformation. Companies that don’t want to fall behind should be preparing and investing now: hiring and upskilling teams, embedding new capabilities, and understanding the necessary architectural changes. Those that wait will struggle to catch up. Agentic AI is already reshaping the enterprise, and only those that move decisively—redesigning their architecture, teams, and ways of working—will unlock its full value. Acknowledgments David Crawford, chairman of Bain & Company’s Global Technology, Media, and Telecommunications practice; Anne Hoecker, global leader of the TMT practice; and Dana Aulanier, practice vice president of the TMT practice, prepared this report. Bain Partners Syed Ali, Laurent-Pierre Baculard, Bharat Bansal, Ann Bosche, Peter Bowen, Steven Breeden, Alessandro Cannarsi, Willy Chang, Matthew Crupi, Arjun Dutt, Greg Fiore, Jonathan Frick, Pascal Gautheron, Adam Haller, Peter Hanbury, Karen Harris, Jonny Holiday, Mark Kovac, Tamara Lewis, David Lipman, Neil Malik, Justin Murphy, Christopher Perry, Bill Radzevych, Paul Renno, Michael Schallehn, Jennifer Smith, Ravi Vijayaraghavan, Jue Wang, and Chuck Whitten; Associate Partners Gabe Dunn, Aaron Lewis, Ryan Petranovich, and Tanvee Rao; and Expert Partners Chris Bell, Purna Doddapaneni, Stephen Hardy, Chris McLaughlin, and Velu Sinha wrote its chapters. The authors also wish to thank Partners David Cho and Maeghan Rouch; Associate Partner Tatum Quinn; Senior Managers Madeline Ayles, Shiv Bery, Mathieu Boutin-Delisle, Tobi Ogunsanya, Sushil Upadhyayula, and Alyssa Zhou; Consultants Jiachen Chu and Gaurav Srivastava; Senior Associate Consultants Margaret Chiang and Pooja Vettical; Associate Consultant Chimo Mgbeokwere; Expert Manager Alexandra Juegelt; and Practice Directors Tarun Gupta and Alex Smyth for their contributions. They would also like to thank these members of the Bain Capability Network: Senior Manager Eva Gupta; Managers Arpit Jain and Vaishali Sharma; Project Leader Anjali Mishra; Associates Aryan Gupta, Kiran Muchandimath, and Bhanu Singh