 AI Adoption Puzzle: Why Usage Is Up But Impact Is Not | BCG 12 captures 25 Jan 2026 - 27 Jun 2026 May JUN Jul 27 2025 2026 2027 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Collection: GDELT Project TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine - http://web.archive.org/web/20260627002142/https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/ai-adoption-puzzle-why-usage-up-impact-not Skip to Main Log in Log error View Profile Edit Profile Manage Subscriptions My Saved Content Logout Our Services Industries Industries Learn how we draw on industry expertise to make companies more competitive. Aerospace and Defense Industry Aerospace and Defense Industry Aerospace and Defense Industry Our aerospace and defense experts help industry players navigate their day-to-day operations and identify ways they can innovate for the future. Visit Page Automotive Industry Automotive Industry Automotive Industry Breakthroughs in automotive technologies and emerging business models are changing the world. We help the leading game changers stay ahead of the curve. Visit Page Consumer Products Industry Consumer Products Industry Consumer Products Industry Brands around the world must master digital to survive. We have the expertise and capabilities to power consumer-centric innovation grounded in data, analytics, and AI. Visit Page Within Consumer Products Industry Fast-Moving Consumer Goods Education Education Education We partner with effective organizations and educators to improve student outcomes and learning models—from K-12 through higher education—locally, nationally, and globally. Visit Page Within Education Higher Education K-12 Education Energy Energy Energy BCG’s energy consultants work with business leaders, governments, and ecosystems to create energy solutions for a net-zero pathway and beyond - that are practical, equitable, and just. Visit Page Within Energy Energy Transition Power and Utilities Renewables and Low-Carbon Solutions Upstream Operations Financial Institutions Financial Institutions Financial Institutions BCG helps global and regional financial institutions build for the future using digital innovations and an ESG focus to drive fundamental change and deliver on evolving customer demands. Visit Page Within Financial Institutions Asset Management Banking Fintech Payments and Transaction Banking Wealth Management Health Care Industry Health Care Industry Health Care Industry We work with organizations around the globe to transform health care operating models enabling them to deliver medical breakthroughs, innovative cures, and transformative patient experiences. Visit Page Within Health Care Industry Biopharma Global Health Health Care Payers, Providers, Systems & Services Medical Devices and Technology Oncology Solutions Value-Based Health Care Industrial Goods Industrial Goods Industrial Goods Our experts provide industrial goods clients with the skills they need to adapt to change and rethink their business models in their rapidly evolving industries. Visit Page Within Industrial Goods Agribusiness Industry Building Materials Industry Chemical Industry Forest Products, Paper, and Packaging Machinery and Industrial Automation Metals and Mining Industry Insurance Industry Insurance Industry Insurance Industry Customers increasingly expect more from insurers. BCG helps companies rise to the challenge and equips them to lead in the digital future. Visit Page Within Insurance Industry Bancassurance Insurtech Life Insurance Property and Casualty Insurance Reinsurance Principal Investors and Private Equity Principal Investors and Private Equity Principal Investors and Private Equity The rapid growth of private capital brings unprecedented opportunities to unlock value while making a positive difference in the world. BCG advises leading investors on how to stay ahead. Visit Page Within Principal Investors and Private Equity Fund Strategy and Operations Portfolio Acceleration Sustainability in Private Equity Tech Capital Public Sector Public Sector Public Sector BCG’s Public Sector practice joins forces with global organizations and governments to transform how they operate so they can better meet increasingly challenging and complex societal problems. Visit Page Within Public Sector Defense and Security Digital Government Economic Development Mobility Space Sector Retail Industry Retail Industry Retail Industry We help the world's leading retailers compete in the digital era by developing and delivering cutting-edge tech strategies and identifying new sources of growth. Visit Page Within Retail Industry Fashion Industry Luxury Goods Restaurant Industry Technology, Media, and Telecommunications Technology, Media, and Telecommunications Technology, Media, and Telecommunications BCG collaborates with technology, media, and telecommunications companies to solve problems and pursue new strategies as they continue to shape the future. Visit Page Within Technology, Media, and Telecommunications 5G Technology Future of Television Growth Tech Media and Entertainment Industry Semiconductors Technology Industry Telecommunications Industry Transportation and Logistics Transportation and Logistics Transportation and Logistics We empower clients to boldly reinvent themselves and embrace digital innovation so they can better serve their customers amid today's volatility. Visit Page Within Transportation and Logistics Logistics Postal and Parcel Industry Rail Industry Shipping Industry and Marine Ports Travel and Tourism Travel and Tourism Travel and Tourism The industry has suffered an unprecedented shock. BCG collaborates with travel and tourism providers as they navigate this turbulence and build resilience for the future. Visit Page Within Travel and Tourism Airline Industry Hospitality and Leisure Industry Urban Planning Urban Planning Urban Planning BCG's urban planning consulting experts help cities drive growth, improve mobility, and enhance livability as urban populations are expected to surge by 2050. Visit Page Within Urban Planning Infrastructure Real Estate Capabilities Capabilities See how we help our clients expand their capabilities on multiple existing—and emerging—fronts. Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence Scaling artificial intelligence can create a massive competitive advantage. Learn how our AI-driven initiatives have helped clients extract value. Visit Page Within Artificial Intelligence AI Agents Generative AI Responsible AI Business and Organizational Purpose Business and Organizational Purpose Business and Organizational Purpose Excavating purpose is among the rewarding journeys companies can take. BCG BrightHouse helps organizations embrace purpose to achieve higher returns, employee engagement, and customer satisfaction. Visit Page Business Resilience Business Resilience Business Resilience Leaders face an uncertain landscape. The impact of each decision feels impossible to predict, which is why they need strategies that are proactive, resilient, and competitive. No matter their starting point, BCG can help. Visit Page Business Transformation Business Transformation Business Transformation Even today's leading companies could benefit from an always-on transformation capability—the kind that engenders resilience and leads to long-term value creation. BCG knows what it takes to build this muscle. Visit Page Within Business Transformation Business Restructuring and Turnaround Performance and Value Acceleration Transformation Climate Change and Sustainability Climate Change and Sustainability Climate Change and Sustainability The time for global climate action is now. BCG helps clients accelerate their climate and sustainability journey and seize new opportunities to build competitive advantage. Visit Page Within Climate Change and Sustainability Climate Risk, Adaptation, and Resilience Decarbonization Green Growth Accelerator Nature-Based Solutions Sustainability Strategy and Transformation Sustainable Finance and Investing Sustainable Operations Corporate Finance and Strategy Corporate Finance and Strategy Corporate Finance and Strategy The rules of business and for maintaining competitive advantage are changing. We help companies reimagine strategy and value creation in a fast-paced world. Visit Page Within Corporate Finance and Strategy Business Strategy Corporate Strategy Family Business Finance Function Excellence Strategic Planning Value Creation Strategy Cost Management Cost Management Cost Management BCG’s cost advantage approach resets costs within a framework that is customized, precise, and thorough. Visit Page Within Cost Management Zero-Based Budgeting Customer Insights Customer Insights Customer Insights Having rich customer insights allows companies to solve pressing business problems and capture growth opportunities. BCG’s Center for Customer Insight arms companies with the tools they need to unlock this advantage. Visit Page Within Customer Insights Customer Data in Emerging Markets Customer Data in Global Markets Customer Demand Customer Experience Customer Journey Digital, Technology, and Data Digital, Technology, and Data Digital, Technology, and Data BCG identifies and delivers high-impact programs to build companies of the future that will outperform the competition in the future. Visit Page Within Digital, Technology, and Data Agile at Scale Augmented and Virtual Reality Blockchain Build-Operate-Transfer Cloud Computing Cybersecurity and Digital Risk Data and Analytics Data and Digital Platform Deep Tech DevOps Digital Ecosystems Digital Maturity Digital Strategy Digital Transformation Emerging Technologies Internet of Things Metaverse Services Quantum Computing Synthetic Biology Tech Function Innovation Strategy and Delivery Innovation Strategy and Delivery Innovation Strategy and Delivery Innovation is extremely difficult—but also necessary. We collaborate closely with organizations on holistic innovation journeys to help them secure long-term competitive advantage. Visit Page Within Innovation Strategy and Delivery Business Model Innovation Corporate Venturing Product Innovation and Engineering International Business International Business International Business We stand side by side with our clients, offering expertise and strategy as they look to expand the boundaries of their businesses in an uncertain and sometimes tumultuous world. Visit Page Within International Business Foreign Direct Investment Go-to-Market Strategy for Emerging Markets International Trade Manufacturing Manufacturing Manufacturing We ask three guiding questions: when, where, and how will you manufacture in an era of emerging technologies and economic uncertainty? We're committed to helping our clients arrive at answers that are right for them. Visit Page Within Manufacturing Industry 4.0 Marketing and Sales Marketing and Sales Marketing and Sales Customer centricity is key and made possible through analytics, agile processes, and a test-and-learn culture. BCG partners with marketing and sales organizations to make it happen. Visit Page Within Marketing and Sales Digital Marketing Digital Sales E-Commerce Marketing Function Excellence Personalization Sales Channel Strategy Salesforce Value Accelerator M&A, Transactions, and PMI M&A, Transactions, and PMI M&A, Transactions, and PMI BCG provides the strategic decision-making capabilities and proactive portfolio management companies need to create value from M&A, transactions, and PMI. Visit Page Within M&A, Transactions, and PMI Carve-Out Divestitures Due Diligence IPO Joint Ventures Mergers and Acquisitions Post-Merger Integration Strategic Alliances Vendor Due Diligence Operations Operations Operations We help clients unlock value from every aspect of their operations, maximizing efficiency and effectiveness in procurement, service operations, supply chains, and beyond. Visit Page Within Operations Capital Projects Excellence Digital Support Functions and Shared Services Operational Excellence Procurement Service Operations Supply Chain Management Organization Strategy Organization Strategy Organization Strategy Organization is at the core of nearly everything we do at BCG. We believe that when clients have the right organization design, the possibilities are endless. Visit Page Within Organization Strategy Behavior Change Culture and Change Management Organization Design Platform Operating Model Smart Simplicity People Strategy People Strategy People Strategy Any company's most important asset is its people. Our experts in leadership, culture, talent, reskilling, and HR help businesses respond to current and future challenges. Visit Page Within People Strategy Digital HR Executive Coaching Future of Work Leadership Development Talent and Skills Pricing and Revenue Management Pricing and Revenue Management Pricing and Revenue Management We bring expertise and data-driven strategies to help clients unleash the power of effective pricing—and unlock its potential to increase the bottom line. Visit Page Within Pricing and Revenue Management B2B Pricing B2C Pricing Revenue Growth Management Risk Management and Compliance Risk Management and Compliance Risk Management and Compliance BCG's Risk and Compliance consulting supports their client's growth ambition with strategic, transformational, and technical functional offerings in Finance. Visit Page Within Risk Management and Compliance Balance Sheet Management Commodity Risk Management Compliance and Crisis Management Credit Risk Management Operational Risk and Resilience Risk Advanced Analytics and Technology Social Impact Social Impact Social Impact By focusing on tangible ways to generate positive social impact (related to climate change, global education, racial equity, and more) we help organizations tackle some of the most pressing issues facing our world today. Visit Page Within Social Impact Food Systems and Food Security Humanitarian Response International Development BCG X BCG X BCG X BCG X disrupts the present and creates the future by building new products, services, and businesses in partnership with the world’s largest organizations. Visit Page Within BCG X The Multiplier Blog by BCG X BCG X Product Library Mark Your Moment Our Insights Our Insights Featured Insights Featured Insights Featured Insights Explore a cross-section of the latest insights and perspectives from BCG experts. Visit Page Within Featured Insights Artificial Intelligence BCG Executive Perspectives Cost Management Climate Change and Sustainability BCG Answer BCG Answer BCG Answer Discover the answer to your most important business challenges. BCG Answer delivers integrated insights powered by our latest cross-functional expertise. Ask us a question The CEO Agenda The CEO Agenda The CEO Agenda A forward-thinking CEO agenda has never been more crucial. Our insights give you greater clarity on what lies ahead, helping you lead with confidence. Visit Page BCG Institute BCG Institute BCG Institute At the BCG Institute, we believe that leadership starts in the mind and that ideas precede action. We bring the ideas and inspiration that will help forward-looking leaders shape their next game. Visit Page My Subscriptions My Subscriptions My Subscriptions Subscribe to our newsletters and e-alerts to stay connected with the latest insights, data, ideas, and perspectives from BCG. Visit Page BCG Alumni BCG Alumni BCG Alumni Access BCG’s alumni network for former and current BCGers. Visit Page Our Company About BCG About About Boston Consulting Group bridges the gap between ambition and outcomes. We team with organizations throughout the world to deliver transformative impact to lead this new era. Visit Page Within About Our Purpose and People Our Expertise Our Commitments Our History Client Impact Client Impact Client Impact Real change happens when strategy, execution, and technology come together. We partner with leading organizations to transform their impact, combining strategic clarity with action and applied AI. Visit Page Leadership Leadership Leadership Learn more about BCG Leadership. Visit Page Offices Offices Offices With offices in more than 100 cities in over 50 countries, we have a truly global perspective. Visit Page Corporate Newsroom Corporate Newsroom Corporate Newsroom Visit our media center for resources, press releases, trending topics, contacts, and more. Visit Page Within Corporate Newsroom Media Contacts Join Us Beyond Is Where We Begin. Beyond Is Where We Begin. When you start with Beyond there’s no limit to how far we can advance the world. Explore Careers Within Careers Search Jobs Early Careers Culture, Values, and Inclusion Experienced Professionals Locations Events Artificial Intelligence The AI Adoption Puzzle: Why Usage Is Up But Impact Is Not By Julie Bedard , Matthew Kropp , Vikram Sivakumar , and Megan Hsu Article December 08, 2025 12 MIN read Key Takeaways To reimagine work and embed AI in core activities, leaders must understand employees’ personal adoption journey and the psychological and organizational factors that hold them back. Employees’ path to adopting AI has four main stages: information assistance, task assistance, delegation, and semiautonomous collaboration. At the different adoption stages, five employee personas tend to cluster: the AI champion, independent explorer, organizational adopter, passive observer, and cautious skeptic. Survey results show more than 85% of employees remain at stages two and three of AI adoption, while less than 10% have reached stage four. But leaders can spur meaningful AI adoption by taking four strategic steps. Save It For Later Saved To My Saved Content Download Article Share Link copied Subscribe BCG Henderson Institute: Discover new thinking shaping the business landscape BCG Henderson Institute: Discover new thinking shaping the business landscape You are subscribed to BCG's BCG Henderson Institute newsletter. Manage Subscriptions Subscribe CEOs of companies in every industry around the world are grappling with a common question: If so many of their employees are using AI , why hasn’t there been an explosion in value creation? A recent BCG survey quantified this failed promise, finding that 60% of companies globally were not generating any material value from AI despite substantial investment. The answer lies in organizations’ focus on AI as a technology deployment, rather than how (or if) employees truly integrate AI into their ways of working. We’ve observed that even leading organizations are often prioritizing the low-hanging fruit—focusing on achieving efficiencies in peripheral or administrative activities, rather than reimagining work by embedding the technology in core, high-value activities. For most companies, getting to the latter point will be a journey, one that centers on the experiences of their employees. Through our research of adoption patterns, we’ve identified five discrete stages that workers go through. Understanding this big picture view enables leaders to chart their company’s overall progress, but they can’t stop there. They’ll also need to deeply understand employees’ personal adoption journey, including the psychological and organizational factors that can hold them back—or propel them forward. Adoption Quality Is the Goal, Not Adoption Rate Most organizations are preoccupied with inputs, such as the number of logins to AI tools or the amount of time spent using them, as measures of adoption. That approach misses the shift in mindset that occurs when AI becomes central to an employee’s core work. This shift activates a virtuous circle—one that creates momentum that drives deeper and more sustained adoption not just for that employee but also across an organization. What really matters, then, is the quality of AI use and how meaningfully work is being reinvented. To deepen AI adoption and improve its impact, organizations must first understand how employees are using the technology. Through our work with dozens of companies, we’ve identified a discernible AI-adoption pattern that spans five stages, starting with employees using AI much like a search engine and, in most cases, ending with semiautonomous collaboration—or in some rare instances today, fully autonomous orchestration by AI agents . (See Exhibit 1.) Monthly Newsletter Subscription BCG Henderson Institute: Discover new thinking shaping the business landscape Subscribe Manage Subscriptions Many organizations misconstrue the initial step of information assistance (stage one) as proof of adoption—a common misconception that we also identified in our surveys of software developers. Deeper engagement takes the form of task assistance (stage two), where AI is used for targeted needs, such as generating code snippets, creating simple visuals, or performing calculations. Task assistance leads to delegation (stage three), where well-defined tasks, such as drafting emails or compiling reports, are assigned to AI. We find that when adoption shifts from delegation to semiautonomous collaboration (stage four), that is the inflection point and the start of real value creation . AI emerges as a true collaborator when AI agents plan and execute work with human oversight, shaping workflows rather than simply responding to requests. For most tasks, this level of adoption is the target, as it involves human judgment, oversight, and ongoing interaction. In rare cases, fully autonomous orchestration (stage five) deploys AI to manage complex processes from start to finish without human intervention. Semiautonomous collaboration and fully autonomous orchestration require true workflow reinvention as well as changes to the roles, team structures, and ways of working . The Personal Adoption Journey While the five stages may help clarify employees’ path to adopting AI, this is not necessarily a linear journey nor one that everyone marches through in lockstep. People’s mindset toward AI, their level of trust in it, their exposure to it and whether t