 Gartner Hype Cycle Identifies Top AI Innovations in 2025 29 captures 05 Aug 2025 - 07 Jul 2026 Jun JUL Aug 07 2025 2026 2027 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Collection: Save Page Now Outlinks TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine - http://web.archive.org/web/20260707194355/https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2025-08-05-gartner-hype-cycle-identifies-top-ai-innovations-in-2025 Sign In About Newsroom Careers Who We Serve For IT & Tech Leaders Chief Information Officer Cybersecurity Data & Analytics Enterprise Architecture Government IT High Tech Information Technology Infrastructure & Operations Product Management Software Engineering Tech Marketing Investment Services For Business Leaders Audit & Risk Communications Customer Service & Support Finance Human Resources Legal & Compliance Marketing Public Sector Leaders Research & Development Sales Supply Chain Our Solutions Ways We Help Clients Analyst Inquiries Confidential 1:1s with experts Trusted Insights For your mission critical priorities First Takes On rapidly evolving challenges Tools Practical ways to tackle problems Peer Insights Tech & services ratings and reviews Consulting On-the-ground support Our Most Popular Tools Magic Quadrant Compare tech solutions Hype Cycle Track emerging tech BuySmart Buy tech with confidence Proposal Reviews Optimize vendor negotiations Gartner Score Benchmark your function Accelerators Fast-track critical decisions Conferences Opportunities to Connect About Gartner Conferences Conferences Calendar Gartner C-level Communities Exhibit With Us AI at Conferences Join peers for AI insights live Conference Roles and Topics Applications & Software Engineering CIO & IT Executives Customer Service Cybersecurity & Risk Management Data & Analytics Digital Workplace Enterprise Risk, Audit & Compliance Finance Human Resources Identity & Access Management IT Infrastructure, Operations & Cloud Marketing Procurement Sales Supply Chain Technology & Service Providers Conference Locations Americas Asia/Pacific & Japan Europe, Middle East & Africa Webinars All Webinars Upcoming Webinars On-Demand Webinars Webinars on AI For the C-Suite Public Sector Webinars AI AI Hub Explore AI strategy, trends and frameworks AskGartner AI-powered access to our insights Win the AI Vendor Race Competing in the $1T AI market AI Use Cases Evaluate and prioritize AI initiatives AI Maturity Model Gauge your AI readiness Latest AI Hype Cycle Track AI innovations New To Role About Newsroom Careers Talk to Us or call jsbacContact Who We Serve For IT & Tech Leaders Chief Information Officer Cybersecurity Data & Analytics Enterprise Architecture Government IT High Tech Information Technology Infrastructure & Operations Product Management Software Engineering Tech Marketing Investment Services For Business Leaders Audit & Risk Communications Customer Service & Support Finance Human Resources Legal & Compliance Marketing Public Sector Leaders Research & Development Sales Supply Chain Our Solutions Ways We Help Clients Analyst Inquiries Confidential 1:1s with experts Trusted Insights For your mission critical priorities First Takes On rapidly evolving challenges Tools Practical ways to tackle problems Peer Insights Tech & services ratings and reviews Consulting On-the-ground support Our Most Popular Tools Magic Quadrant Compare tech solutions Hype Cycle Track emerging tech BuySmart Buy tech with confidence Proposal Reviews Optimize vendor negotiations Gartner Score Benchmark your function Accelerators Fast-track critical decisions Conferences Opportunities to Connect About Gartner Conferences Conferences Calendar Gartner C-level Communities Exhibit With Us AI at Conferences Join peers for AI insights live Conference Roles and Topics Applications & Software Engineering CIO & IT Executives Customer Service Cybersecurity & Risk Management Data & Analytics Digital Workplace Enterprise Risk, Audit & Compliance Finance Human Resources Identity & Access Management IT Infrastructure, Operations & Cloud Marketing Procurement Sales Supply Chain Technology & Service Providers Conference Locations Americas Asia/Pacific & Japan Europe, Middle East & Africa Webinars All Webinars Upcoming Webinars On-Demand Webinars Webinars on AI For the C-Suite Public Sector Webinars AI AI Hub Explore AI strategy, trends and frameworks AskGartner AI-powered access to our insights Win the AI Vendor Race Competing in the $1T AI market AI Use Cases Evaluate and prioritize AI initiatives AI Maturity Model Gauge your AI readiness Latest AI Hype Cycle Track AI innovations New To Role Talk to Us or call jsbacContact Newsroom Topics Audit & Risk Customer Service & Support Finance Human Resources Information Technology Legal & Compliance Marketing Sales Supply Chain Media Contacts Media Resources Media Registration Attribution Guide Investor Relations Public Relations Policy Gartner Conferences Insights Business and Technology Insights Webinars Podcasts Archive Newsroom Topics Audit & Risk Customer Service & Support Finance Human Resources Information Technology Legal & Compliance Marketing Sales Supply Chain Media Contacts Media Resources Media Registration Attribution Guide Investor Relations Public Relations Policy Gartner Conferences Insights Business and Technology Insights Webinars Podcasts Archive Back to top Gartner client? Log in for personalized search results. Newsroom / Information Technology / Press Release Gartner Hype Cycle Identifies Top AI Innovations in 2025 SYDNEY, Australia, August 5, 2025 Analysts to Explore the Latest AI Trends at Gartner IT Symposium/Xpo, September 8-10 on the Gold Coast AI agents and AI-ready data are the two fastest advancing technologies on the 2025 Gartner Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence , according to Gartner, Inc., a business and technology insights company. These technologies are experiencing heightened interest this year, accompanied by ambitious projections and speculative promises, placing them at the Peak of Inflated Expectations . Gartner Hype Cycles provide a graphic representation of the maturity and adoption of technologies and applications, and how they are potentially relevant to solving real business problems and exploiting new opportunities. Gartner Hype Cycle methodology gives a view of how a technology or application will evolve over time, providing a sound source of insight to manage its deployment within the context of specific business goals. “With AI investment remaining strong this year, a sharper emphasis is being placed on using AI for operational scalability and real-time intelligence,” said Haritha Khandabattu , Senior Director Analyst at Gartner. “This has led to a gradual pivot from generative AI (GenAI) as a central focus, toward the foundational enablers that support sustainable AI delivery, such as AI-ready data and AI agents .” Among the AI innovations Gartner expects will reach mainstream adoption within the next 5 years, multimodal AI and AI trust, risk and security management (TRiSM) have been identified as dominating the Peak of Inflated Expectations (see Figure 1). Together, these developments will enable more robust, innovative and responsible AI applications, transforming how businesses and organizations operate. Upcoming webinar: The Gartner Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence 2025 Identify and invest in the most promising AI innovations for your organization’s unique context and workload Benchmark your infrastructure to support scalable, business-aligned AI deployments Foster collaboration between AI and business stakeholders to maximize value delivery Figure 1: Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence 2025 Source: Gartner (August 2025) “Despite the enormous potential business value of AI, it isn’t going to materialize spontaneously,” said Khandabattu. “Success will depend on tightly business aligned pilots, proactive infrastructure benchmarking, and coordination between AI and business teams to create tangible business value.” AI Agents AI agents are autonomous or semiautonomous software entities that use AI techniques to perceive, make decisions, take actions and achieve goals in their digital or physical environments. Using AI practices and techniques such as LLMs, organizations are creating and deploying AI agents to achieve complex tasks. “To reap the benefits of AI agents, organizations need to determine the most relevant business contexts and use cases, which is challenging given no AI agent is the same and every situation is different,” said Khandabattu. “Although AI agents will continue to become more powerful, they can’t be used in every case, so use will largely depend on the requirements of the situation at hand.” AI Ready Data AI-ready data ensures datasets are optimized for AI applications, enhancing accuracy and efficiency. Readiness is determined through the data’s ability to prove its fitness for use for specific AI use cases. It can only be determined contextually to the AI use case and the AI technique used, which forces new approaches to data management. According to Gartner, organizations that invest in AI at scale need to evolve their data management practices and capabilities to extend them to AI. This will cater to existing and upcoming business demands, ensure trust, avoid risk and compliance issues, preserve intellectual property and reduce bias and hallucinations. Multimodal AI Multimodal AI models are trained with multiple types of data simultaneously, such as images, video, audio and text. By integrating and analyzing diverse data sources, they can better understand complex situations better than models that use only one type of data. This helps users make sense of the world and opens up new avenues for AI applications. Multimodal AI will become increasingly integral to capability advancement in every application and software product across all industries over the next five years, according to Gartner research. AI TRiSM AI TRiSM plays a crucial role in ensuring ethical and secure AI deployment. It comprises four layers of technical capabilities that support enterprise policies for all AI use cases and help assure AI governance, trustworthiness, fairness, safety, reliability, security, privacy and data protection. “AI brings new trust, risk and security management challenges that conventional controls don’t address,” said Khandabattu. “Organizations must evaluate and implement layered AI TRiSM technology to continuously support and enforce policies across all AI entities in use.” Gartner clients can read more in the report Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence, 2025 . Learn how to build actionable strategies to align your business, empower your teams, and boost revenue in the age of agentic AI in the complimentary Gartner insights 5 Steps to Seize Agentic AI Opportunity . About Gartner IT Symposium/Xpo Additional AI trends will be presented during Gartner IT Symposium/Xpo , the world's most important conference for CIOs and other IT executives. Gartner analysts and attendees will explore how to become agents of change in their organizations and harness AI for successful digital transformation. Follow news and updates from the conferences on X and LinkedIn using #GartnerSYM, and on the Gartner Newsroom . Upcoming dates and locations for Gartner IT Symposium/Xpo include: September 8-10, 2025 | Gold Coast, Australia October 20-23, 2025 | Orlando, FL October 28-30, 2025 | Yokohama, Japan November 10-13, 2025 | Barcelona, Spain November 17-19, 2025 | Kochi, India About Gartner for Information Technology Executives Gartner for Information Technology Executives provides actionable, objective insights to CIOs and IT leaders to help them drive their organizations through digital transformation and lead business growth. Additional information is available at www.gartner.com/en/information-technology . Follow news and updates from Gartner for IT Executives on X and LinkedIn using #GartnerIT. Visit the IT Newsroom for more information and insights. Media contact Emma Keen Gartner emma.keen@gartner.com All Contacts News Archive Latest releases Announcement | Jul 7, 2026 Gartner Predicts 60% of Organizations Will Adopt Smaller Software Engineering Teams by 2029 Information Technology Q&A | Jul 1, 2026 Gartner Predicts 20% of Finance Organizations Will Pivot All Talent-related Investments to Advanced Digital Capabilities by 2028 Finance Announcement | Jul 1, 2026 Gartner Says $234 Billion in Enterprise Application Software Spend Is at Risk from Agentic AI Information Technology Sorry, No data match for your criteria. Please refine your filters to display data. About Gartner Gartner (NYSE: IT) delivers actionable, objective business and technology insights that drive smarter decisions and stronger performance on an organization’s mission-critical priorities. To learn more, visit gartner.com . About Us Investor Relations Related Resources Webinar AI, Autonomy, and Architects: The Future of Site Reliability Engineering Register Now Webinar Using Answer Engines to Drive the Customer Journey Register Now Webinar Emerging Technology Adoption Radar for Heads of EA Register Now Webinar Who Do You Trust to Orchestrate Your AI Agents? Register Now Webinar AI, Autonomy, and Architects: The Future of Site Reliability Engineering Register Now Sorry, No data match for your criteria. Please refine your filters to display data. About Gartner Who We Are About Us Corporate Responsibility Investor Relations Newsroom What We Do Insights Conferences Consulting Get in Touch Contact Contact Us Become a Client Office Locations Technical Support Careers Why Gartner Search Careers Our Culture Careers Blog Latest Insights Resources Featured Insights Webinars Newsletter Client Stories About Gartner Who We Are About Us Corporate Responsibility Investor Relations Newsroom What We Do Insights Conferences Consulting Get in Touch Contact Contact Us Become a Client Office Locations Technical Support Careers Why Gartner Search Careers Our Culture Careers Blog Latest Insights Resources Featured Insights Webinars Newsletter Client Stories Policies Privacy Policy Terms of Use Ombuds Site Map ©2026 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. ©2026 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 