 How McKinsey Uses the SCR Framework for Powerful Slide Outlines Howie Mann Startup Strategy Subscribe Articles Search About Subscribe Topics finance (31) product (30) management (27) engineering (14) marketing (10) All Articles My other project Investor Tool World's largest tech companies Popular Articles How Charlie Munger avoided self pity How Costco makes money Best charts to use for presentations - 4 key charts Inversion: How Charlie Munger tackles hard problems How McKinsey Uses the SCR Framework for Powerful Slide Outlines Return on Invested Capital (ROIC) - Formula and Real World Examples How much is Netflix worth in 2024? $US100bn How Costco avoids failure? Focus on what sucks Share Buybacks vs Dividends: Who wins? IRR vs MIRR Formula Explained: Choose the Right Metric for Your Investments How to respond to product feature requests? Ask “When was the last time” Understanding 6 Key Financial Ratios - Best Buy vs Netflix vs Meta vs Apple REST API Basics - 4 Things you Need to Know 7 Types of Bias - Survivorship, Confirmation, Framing and More Examples Kano Model Basics - 3 Things you Need to Know Employee Training: Who is the Person Responsible? Data Table UX: 5 Rules of Thumb User Interface Design: 5 Rules of Thumb Cognitive Reflection Test - Examples of Reacting vs Checking How Much is YouTube Worth? Over US$180bn in 2022 The IKEA Effect - Why people fall in love with their own ideas How the US Air Force Ditched the "Average" and Saved Lives How to Run a Growth Experiment - Learn the 4 Steps Financial Model Formatting - 3 Core Best Practices Finite State Machines - A Common Tool for Product Owners, Designers & Developers 5 Questions to Ask to Find Product Market Fit - User Interviews Invert, Always Invert - Find out how to kill pilots How Much is Alibaba Worth? US$900 billion in 2021 What are the Fiduciary Duties of a Director? Clean Architecture Node.js - Build a REST API < All Articles How McKinsey Uses the SCR Framework for Powerful Slide Outlines 4 minute read | Sep 28, 2024 management , finance , product Share this article: Top consulting firms like McKinsey use the SCR (Situation-Complication-Resolution) framework for writing engaging slides. It is a powerful tool that uses storytelling to break down complex situations, identify challenges and propose clear actionable solutions. This article shows how to apply the SCR framework with practical examples. Sections The SCR framework Situation - What is at stake? Complication - What is challenging? Resolution - What can be done? Download SCR Framework Template The SCR framework The Situation-Complication-Resolution (SCR) framework organises your key messages into three acts: Situation : The starting point that explains why action is needed by asking, “What is at stake?” Complication : Highlights why the situation is challenging and what obstacles need addressing. Resolution : Provides a clear answer to the complications, outlining actionable steps. Within each SCR act, use the Dot-Dash method to write an action-oriented title that clearly conveys the message (Dot) and includes a data point or message to support it (Dash). Each Dot-Dash will become a slide within each act. Now, let’s apply this with a real-world example. Imagine you need to present a strategic review of Netflix’s growth strategy. Here’s how the SCR framework can be applied. Situation - What is at stake? In the first act of the SCR framework, we define the situation by addressing the stakes involved. For Netflix, it has emerged as a global streaming giant off the back of heavy strategic content investment. The stakes are important because it has created high expectations for growth and profitability in a highly competitive market. Situation - What is at stake? Netflix dominates global streaming through heavy content investment. Netflix dominates the global streaming market Netflix streaming revenue has grown from +$1bn to +$38bn over the past 15 years Netflix has the most subscribers globally growing from 9m to 278m households over the same period Driven by heavy investment in original content Reinvesting 90% of all revenue back into content pre-covid Complication - What is challenging? In the next act, we explain some of the challenges facing the current situation and why it may require thinking through. For Netflix, growth has reached a ceiling in its core US market. It has relied on growing profitability by increasing US subscription pricing while investing less on content. In a competitive environment, relying on this strategy alone is risky. Complication - What is challenging? US growth ceiling and rising competition. But, it has reached a growth ceiling in its core US market Flat household subscriber growth in North America Content spending has reduced while pricing has doubled Content spend has halved post covid while US prices have doubled in the past decade. Is this sustainable? Resolution - What can be done? In the final act, we provide clear answers and options to address the challenges. For Netflix, while US growth is close to a ceiling, international markets are growing faster with greater opportunity to win market share and increase pricing. Netflix’s local originals strategy is working and could be the answer to sustaining growth while spending smarter on content investment. Resolution - What can be done? Leverage international pricing and tailored content. International has outpaced US with big opportunity to grow subs and pricing International is now 70% of global subs and +55% of revenues International pricing remains 45% below US Local originals strategy is working Non-english titles generated 30% of watch time, but also popular in other international markets (Squid game, Lupin, Physical 100) Download SCR Framework Template Download Situation-Complication-Resolution (SCR) framework template - SCR Framework Template (Google Doc) . Want more tips? Get future posts with actionable tips in under 5 minutes and a bonus cheat sheet on '10 Biases Everyone Should Know'. Your email stays private. No ads ever. Unsubscribe anytime. Your email address Subscribe Loading... Subscribe Loading... Success You will receive future articles from howie@mannhowie.com Download Free PDF My other project Investor Tool World's largest tech companies Share this article: < All Articles Contact Howie Mann via LinkedIn or Email Light Mode 
